expand on nixos configuration testing (#305)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/nixos/integration-testing-using-virtual-machines.md

in
  pkgs.nixosTest {
    name = "minimal-test";
    nodes.machine = { config, pkgs, ... }: {

      users.users.alice = {
        isNormalUser = true;
        extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
        packages = with pkgs; [
          firefox
          tree
        ];
      };

      system.stateVersion = "22.11";
    };
    testScript = ''
      machine.wait_for_unit("default.target")
      machine.succeed("su -- alice -c 'which firefox'")
      machine.fail("su -- root -c 'which firefox'")
    '';
  }
```

## Running tests

To set up all machines and execute the test script:

```shell-session
$ nix-build minimal-test.nix
```

    ...
    test script finished in 10.96s
    cleaning up
    killing machine (pid 10)
    (0.00 seconds)
    /nix/store/bx7z3imvxxpwkkza10vb23czhw7873w2-vm-test-run-minimal-test

## Interactive Python shell to interact with virtual machine

When developing tests or when something breaks, it’s useful to interactively tinker with the test or access a terminal for a machine.

To interactively start a Python session with the testing framework:

```shell-session
$ $(nix-build -A driverInteractive minimal-test.nix)/bin/nixos-test-driver
```

> You can run any of the testing operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you can run any of the testing operations.
```

The `testScript` attribute from `minimal-test.nix` definition can be executed with `test_script()` function.

> 
> Within this Python shell you can enter a interactive shell and run Python commands like those in the test script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> If a virtual machine is not yet started, the test environment takes care of it on the first call of a method of a `machine` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a virtual machine is not yet started, the test environment takes care of it on the first call of a method on a `machine` object.
```

> But you can also manually trigger the start of the virtual machine by using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But you can also manually trigger the start of the virtual machine with:
```

```shell-session
>>> machine.start()
```
for a specific node,

or

```shell-session
>>> start_all()
```

> for all specified nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for all nodes.
```

You can enter a interactive shell on the virtual machine using:

```shell-session
>>> machine.shell_interact()
```

> and run commandline commands like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and run shell commands like:
```

```shell-session
uname -a
```

    Linux server 5.10.37 #1-NixOS SMP Fri May 14 07:50:46 UTC 2021 x86_64 GNU/Linux

> <details><summary> Re-run successful tests </summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<details><summary>Re-running successful tests</summary>

<!-- FIXME: this should be a separate recipe that can be linked to, as it's a bit of knowledge one will need now and again. -->
```

> 
> <!-- i think this section became relevant to me simply to test the example. maybe more important is to mention how to get test results (like logs etc) -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Because test results are kept in the Nix store, a successful test is cached.
This means that Nix will not run the test a second time as long as the test setup (node configuration and test script) stays semantically the same.
Therefore, to run a test again, one needs to remove the result.

If you would try to delete the result using the symbolic link, you will get the following error:

```shell-session
nix-store --delete ./result
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    finding garbage collector roots...
    0 store paths deleted, 0.00 MiB freed
    error: Cannot delete path '/nix/store/4klj06bsilkqkn6h2sia8dcsi72wbcfl-vm-test-run-unnamed' since it is still alive. To find out why, use: nix-store --query --roots

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Instead, remove the symbolic link and only then remove the cached result:

```shell-session
rm ./result
nix-store --delete /nix/store/4klj06bsilkqkn6h2sia8dcsi72wbcfl-vm-test-run-unnamed
```

This can be also done with one command:

```shell-session
result=$(readlink -f ./result) rm ./result && nix-store --delete $result
```
<details>

## Tests that need multiple virtual machines

> Tests can utilize multiple virtual machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tests can involve multiple virtual machines.
```

> This example uses the use-case of a REST interface to a Postgres database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses the use-case of a [REST](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/REST) interface to a [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) database.
```

The following example Nix expression is adapted from [How to use NixOS for lightweight integration tests](https://www.haskellforall.com/2020/11/how-to-use-nixos-for-lightweight.html).

This tutorial follows [PostgREST tutorial](https://postgrest.org/en/stable/tutorials/tut0.html), a generic [RESTful API](https://restfulapi.net/) for PostgreSQL.

If you skim over the official tutorial, you'll notice there's quite a bit of setup in order to test if all the steps work.

The setup includes:

> - A virtual machine named `server` running postgreSQL and postgREST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A virtual machine named `server` running PostgreSQL and PostgREST.
```

- A virtual machine named `client` running HTTP client queries using `curl`.
- A `testScript` orchestrating testing logic between `client` and `server`.

> 
> <!-- Because some of the needed packages of this example are broken in 22.11 release this example uses a specific revision of nixpkgs.
> Additionally this example shows the value of [pinning](<ref-pinning-nixpkgs>) a test to a specific revision of `nixpkgs`.
> Tests that make use of nixpkgs versions before 22.11 need to choose names that do not contain whitespaces.-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The complete `postgrest.nix` file looks like the following:

```{code-block}
let

>   # Pin nixpkgs, see pinning tutorial for more details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # Pin Nixpkgs, as some packages are broken in the 22.11 release
```

  nixpkgs = fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/0f8f64b54ed07966b83db2f20c888d5e035012ef.tar.gz";

>   pkgs = import nixpkgs {config = {}; overlays = [];};

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  pkgs = import nixpkgs { config = {}; overlays = []; };
```

  # Single source of truth for all tutorial constants

>   database      = "postgres";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  database = "postgres";
```

(integration-testing-vms)=

# Integration testing using virtual machines

This tutorial aims to be compatible with NixOS release 22.11.

## What will you learn?

This tutorial introduces the functionality of Nixpkgs to write automated tests to debug NixOS configurations independent of a working NixOS installation.

## What do you need?

- A working installation of [Nix Package Manager](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/installation.html) or [NixOS](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-installation).

> - Basic knowledge of the [Nix language](<nix-language>).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Basic knowledge of the [Nix language](<reading-nix-language>).
```

  # NixOS module shared between server and client
  sharedModule = {

>     # Since it's common for CI not to have $DISPLAY available, you have to explicitly tell the tests "please don't expect any screen available"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Since it's common for CI not to have $DISPLAY available, explicitly disable graphics support
```

    virtualisation.graphics = false;
  };

in 
  pkgs.nixosTest {

>     # NixOS tests are run inside a virtual machine, and here you specify system of the machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # NixOS tests are run inside a virtual machine, and here you specify its system type
```

                  db-schema = "${schema}"
                  db-anon-role = "${username}"
              '';
            in "${pkgs.haskellPackages.postgrest}/bin/postgrest ${configuration}";
          serviceConfig.User = username;
        };
      };

      client = {
        imports = [ sharedModule ];
      };
    };

    # Disable linting for simpler debugging of the testScript
    skipLint = true;

    testScript = ''
      import json
      import sys

      start_all()

      server.wait_for_open_port(${toString postgrestPort})

      expected = [
          {"id": 1, "done": False, "task": "finish tutorial 0", "due": None},
          {"id": 2, "done": False, "task": "pat self on back", "due": None},
      ]

      actual = json.loads(
          client.succeed(
              "${pkgs.curl}/bin/curl http://server:${toString postgrestPort}/${table}"
          )
      )

      assert expected == actual, "table query returns expected content"
    '';
}
```

Unlike the previous example, the virtual machines need an expressive name to distinguish them.
For this example we choose `client` and `server`.

> To set up all machines and execute the test script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set up all machines and run the test script:
```

```shell-session
nix-build postgrest.nix
```

    ...
    test script finished in 10.96s
    cleaning up
    killing client (pid 10)
    killing server (pid 22)
    (0.00 seconds)
    /nix/store/bx7z3imvxxpwkkza10vb23czhw7873w2-vm-test-run-unnamed

> to run the test run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 
> ```shell-session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> $ nix-build postgrest.nix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

## Additional information regarding NixOS tests:

>   - NixOS Tests section in [NixOS manual](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-nixos-tests)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

That is reference

  - Running integration tests on CI requires hardware acceleration, which many CIs do not support.

>     To run integration tests on [GitHub Actions](<github-actions>) see [how to disable hardware acceleration](https://github.com/cachix/install-nix-action#how-do-i-run-nixos-tests).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    To run integration tests on [GitHub Actions](<github-actions>) see [how to disable hardware acceleration](https://github.com/cachix/install-nix-action#how-do-i-run-nixos-tests).
```

>   - NixOS comes with a large set of tests that serve also as educational examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - NixOS comes with a large set of tests that serve also as educational examples.

```

    A good inspiration is [Matrix bridging with an IRC](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/matrix/appservice-irc.nix).

>   - [NixOS.wiki on  NixOS Testing library](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/NixOS_Testing_library) seems to be mostly outdated (last edit 05.11.2021)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<!-- TODO: move examples from https://nixos.wiki/wiki/NixOS_Testing_library to the NixOS manual and troubleshooting tips to nix.dev -->
```
